From Hanselman it's dot com.
It's Hanselman. It's a weekly
discussion with web developer and
technologists. Scott Hanselman hosted by
Carl Franklin. This is Lawrence Ryan announced
some show number one 68
recorded live Thursday, June 25th, 2009. Support
for Hanselman it's just provided
by Tellerik rad controls, the
most comprehensive suite of components
for windows forms and asp.net
web applications online@wwwdottelerikdotcomandby.net developers journal
the world's leading.net developer magazine
online at www dot
dot com. In this episode,
Scott talks with Aaron over
of Novell about the banshee
project. Hi, this is Scott
Hanselman, and this is another
episode of Hansel minutes. And
today I've got an opportunity
to talk to Aaron Bach
over Aaron works for Novell,
and he's the founder of
the banshee project. And also
the lead maintainer banshee is
a really interesting project that
is written in mano and
runs on gosh, just about
every platform that there is.
Thanks Aaron, for chatting with
me today. Thanks for having
me. So, so what's the
story with banshee? So Batu
is a project I started,
I guess, early in 2005,
the original goal was just
that there was a gap
on the Linux desktop that
we wanted to fill. Namely,
there wasn't a really good
media player. So the original
goal was to just develop
a media player that was
sort of like iTunes and
we were doing this on
the, on the mano platform.
So that's just kind of
how it evolved. And over
time we ended up kind
of really growing it into
more than just the Linux
app. So four or five
years ago, that's 2005. That's
like 50 years ago in,
in internet years. You, you
took a bet on mano
that long ago. So many
people ask the question is
mano ready? Is it ready
for prime time? You thought
it was ready five years
ago. Yes, that's correct. So
one of the original goals
with Bantu was that we
actually wanted to use it
as sort of a showcase
application for mano itself. It
was a time at Novell
when we were writing actually
a lot of desktop applications
in mano. So we wrote
F spot as well, which
is a, it's a photo
management application and tomboy, which
is a note taking application
and you can collaborate with
it and that's, and these,
these other projects have grown
and evolved in similar fashions
as well. And what happened
is, you know, as we're
developing banshee and F spot
and tomboy and beagle our
search strategy, we're actually finding
problems in Moto and we're
fixing problems in motto. So
by way of, of using
motto at an early, we're
actually helping grow motto as
a platform. So it's a
way of, of, you know,
seriously dogfooding our, our, our
platform here. So, you know,
everything kind of mixes together
and grows as one. So
banshee was kind of a
forcing function to push mano
kind of to its limits.
Yeah, correct. And you know,
for the first couple of
years, or two or three
years here, you know, we
would run into problems all
the time where, you know,
we might not otherwise run
into, so yeah, we pushed
back on motto and motto
pushes back on us and,
and ultimately we end up
with better products all around
there is for instance, really
early on when we were
just getting generic support in,
in, in the C sharp
compiler, the Montessori sharp compiler
Batu was actually the first
project to, to actually switch
to D to generics. So
we ran into of course,
a bunch of bugs in
the compiler interpreting, you know,
the, the C sharp spec
on generics. So we ultimately,
we would fix bugs in
the compiler, but then the
distributions, the Linux distributions that
actually shipped the compiler, we
couldn't use that. So we
had to actually bundle our
own compiler as part of
the build process for banshee
to sort of bootstrap until
the mano project actually had
kind of released those changes
into the wild Yikes. That's
pretty bleeding edge. So yeah,
but you know, the end
result is, is the model
platform at this stage. And
in 2009, especially with the
two dot four release, which
is a long term support
release, you know, we have
full C-sharp three, you know,
with link and generics and,
and all that good stuff.
So we're, we're definitely, you
know, it's a real platform
that should really be looked
at seriously. Now, a lot
of people have probably heard
of mano, maybe they've read,
you know, Miguel's blog, or
they've looked at some stuff
online, but just to, just
to be clear, we should
probably talk a little bit
about motto that people who
work on mano haven't looked
at the dotnet source code.
They're basically doing a complete
black box implementation of, of.net
reading from the specs. It's
a complete reimagination, but, but
it's, it's, it's L compatible.
I mean, I can, I
can compile something on mano
on Linux and it'll run
on windows. Yes, that's correct.
And you know, so mano
is a very, very large
project. And at the very
core is we have implementations
of the C sharp compiler,
and then there's a, an
implementation of the jet and
the garbage collector and all
that. And of course that's
written in C and then
the third kind of tier
that, that is the core
of them on a project
are actually implementations at the
class library. So, you know,
system XML and that's core
lab. And so on those,
those class implementations are actually
written based on the public
API. So the actual code
underneath there between dotnet and
Moto, or are completely separate
libraries, but they're, they're API
compatible, they're API compatible. So
you can take a MSI
L code generated by the.net
C-sharp compiler CSC, and you
can run it on Moto
and vice versa. So that
means if I use system.io
dot file, no matter whether
I do it on windows
and our.net compiler and my
models and yours, when it
all gets linked up, it's
going to, it's going to
work, Correct. It'll work on
either platform. Okay. And this
is interesting because talking about
this will get us into
some of the challenges that
you got into on, on
banshee. So I did this
article a long, long time
ago that we called the
myth of dotnet purity. This
was back when sun had
started their a hundred percent
Java thing. And they were
saying, are you a hundred
percent Java is your code
100% pure Java? And it
was kind of a reminder.
The article was meant to
be a reminder that at
some point somebody is going
to get onto the metal.
You know, someone's going to
call load library, and someone's
going to call C code
that, that, you know, pure
managed code is kind of
a myth with all of
these libraries. You know, you
may be calling system diode
on a file, but someone's
going to call some low
level C runtime function. That's
going to, you know, get
down on the metal. Does
that mean that in, in
mano, there are, there are
two implementations of system that
I would not file one
for, we have a three,
actually one for Mac and
one for Lennox, and one
for windows that, that actually
do the work of opening
the file. Yes, that's correct.
So there's a couple different
things to look at here.
One is the actual.net library.
So system.io, for instance, it
has to obviously be compatible
function-wise, you know, if there
are any bugs, which, you
know, of course there aren't,
is there any bugs in
Microsoft's implementation? We have to
be bug for bug compatible.
So, so, you know, if,
if there's a, if there's
a code path that you
hit in, in a.net API,
that is an optimal, then
we sort of have to
take that hit as well
to ensure that we stay
compatible. So that being said,
and, and I'll use this
I'll use system. IO is
a great example when you
use the system IO APIs
on Linux or on a
POSIX operating system. So this
means the Mac as well,
or, or a BSD, you
actually incur a little, a
little bit of a performance
hit when you use these
API APIs. Some of that's
related to sort of workarounds
and compatibilities that have to
be met on the underlying
implementation and Moto, and some
of that's because there are
pieces of the system IO
API that don't really make
sense. They're not really conducive
to performance. One of these
examples is say that get
files method on, on system
IO directory. It returns an
array instead of being IEnumerable.
So what happens if you're
walking a large directory and
we ran into this specifically
in banshee, where we're, where
we would crawl your media
directory, recursively, to look for
files to load, we would
have to walk the directory,
but you couldn't act on
any of those files until
the actual directory recursion was
complete because the array had
to be created and then
returned. So you end up
with a lot of stack
and heap overhead there, but
you also can't act on
what you're looking for until
that that array has created.
So that sucks. So yeah,
we have, you know, that's
a problem on.net, but it
also by extension is a
problem on mano to be
compatible, right? So the mano
project has implemented tons and
tons and tons of extra
libraries that work on both
mano and.net. There is a
layer called mano dot Unix
or monitor dot POSIX, which
is a separate API that
sort of allows you to
work around these problems. So
there's a, there's like a,
and this isn't exactly the
right API name, but there's
a mano.posix.io, for instance, with
an API, similar to the
system IO API, but it
provides a get files method
that uses innumerable innumerable instead.
And, you know, it does
things like yield, yield returns,
files as they're walked. So
it's that implementation is allowed
to use the direct POSIX
API, the C API, which
is much, much faster than
the sort of safe and
compatible implementation inside of system.io.
So the way this is
kind of architected in batches,
we have an actual IO
abstraction layer and the default
implementation of that abstraction uses
system.io. So that that implementation
will work. It'll, it's functionally
correct on all platforms, be
it windows, Mac, or Linux.
But if we detect that
you're running on a POSIX
compatible system, we load our
POSIX IO backend instead, and
that, and that backend implements
are abstracted. IOPI using the
mano POSIX implementation. So we
ended up actually, you know,
performing better and in a
lot of cases on Linux
than we do on windows.
Interesting. And that, and that
kind of does, it's a
perfect example of the, the
myth of, of purity in
the sense that here's an
application that, you know, you
write once and basically debug
it, Right? So, I mean,
that's just a small example.
We have similar abstractions for,
for hardware, for integration into
desktop environments. So for example,
in genoma a desktop environment
for Linux, there's an API
that we can use to
inhibit the screensaver when you're
playing video and full screen.
So of course that API
doesn't exist on windows or
in Mac. So we have
a few layers that we
have a hardware layer that,
and these are abstractions. So
you would implement a hardware
backend for Mac, a hardware
backend for, for Linux and
one for windows. And then
we have platform abstraction layers
where you implement sort of
specific things for desktop environments
or, or the operating system.
So we would implement the
screensaver thing for windows, Mac,
and Linux. And these are
all actually mano adding extensions.
So everything is, is fully
dynamic. None of this non-core
code is actually compiled into
banshee itself. They're all written
as separate assemblies or extensions
that load in at runtime
based on the environment and
the actual startup profile for
banshee. Nice. So this is,
this is nice. So this,
this is moving really beyond
the, the old style of
things that we used to
do in Java. When we
would say, basically we have
a big switch statement, you
know, and if, if on
Macintosh, do this else do
that, you've really pulled that
stuff out. And you just
pointed out mano dot addins,
which is a plugin model
that's that came before meth,
the managing sensibility framework, which
I think now is open
source and is something that
mano could potentially use if,
if you wanted to. Right.
Correct. So, so mono Adams
has been around for a
couple of years, and the
idea was just that you
define extension points, which are,
which are APIs that could
be interfaces, or they could
be, you know, sort of
factory classes. And then you
define addins that implement certain
extension points. And at runtime,
mano addins sort of reflects
over any assemblies you give
it. And it looks for
these resource files, which are,
they're basically XML files that
describe whether a certain class
and that extension extends any
extension point defined in the
core application. Of course, reflecting
is, can be very slow.
So mano addins on the
first run. It will, it
will reflect the assemblies, but
it also creates a database,
a binary database of the
extension points that are the
extensions and the extension points
that should sort of mix
in that environment. So then
on a subsequent run or
until any, any of the
assemblies change, you're not, it's
not reflecting again. So it's
very, very fast, at least
on the second startup. Okay.
So it's a little, a
little jitter there to make
those extension points Correct. And
depending on the build environment,
or, you know, if we're
shipping a runtime build or,
I mean, a, if we're
not shipping a debug build,
for instance, we can actually
generate that, that extension database
ahead of time. Cause we
can guarantee that the assemblies
aren't going to change for
a given release, so that,
so that, you know, if
you're not in a debug
environment, you won't actually incur
that startup cost on the
first run, but, but you
know, meth came around fairly
recently, I guess within the
last year we've heard a
lot of meth noise and
it became open source, which
is fantastic and mono addins,
they're, they're very similar, but
I think, and I haven't
looked into meth too extensively,
but I think mano Adams
is probably a little more
detailed. In fact, one of
the, one of the proposals
is to rebase Moto addons
on meth itself. So meth
is a little more low
level. It does a lot
of the same things ultimately,
but what mano addons provides
is a greater sort of
description model of your extensions.
So that's, so you can
ultimately achieve the same thing
with both frameworks, but it'd
be really interesting to see
mano addins actually rebased on
top of meth. And of
course, Moto addons itself is,
you know, runs on all
the platforms. So you can
use motto addins with just
a regular.net application. You don't,
you're not actually tied to
mano here. You could, you
know, you load the mano
addins assemblies in visual studio
and you just start using
the API and you distribute
those assemblies with your application,
which of course are MIT
X, 11 license, which is
very similar to the, the
new MSPL from Microsoft. So
there's no, no worry of
distribution problems here. Okay. So
just to make sure that,
that, that we're clear and
correct me if I'm wrong
here, that this means that
a windows developer using visual
studio might want to bring
in mano dot something one
of those names basis, because
it provides actual functionality. They
wouldn't necessarily be using mano
in the sense that the
runtime isn't mano, but they
could definitely look at those
libraries if they provided value
to them. Correct. Absolutely. And
there's, you know, we have
dozens of, of sort of
add on libraries that kind
of just belong under the
motto project as a giant
umbrella, but aren't specifically related
to motto as, as a
platform. Another example is another
library maintained called mono zero
camp, and it's a, it's
an API that's built on
motto admins as well, that
implements the bone as your,
or, or zero COVID API
from Apple and on windows
that uses the actual C
library from Apple called Bonjour.
But on Linux, it uses
another platform called , which
is just kind of a
completely separate MD and SSD
implementation, but it allows basically
an application to use a
single API regardless of the
underlying zero COVID platform on
a given system. So on
Mac and windows, it uses
the same library on Linux.
It can use the actual
of library as well or
a separate platform, the platform.
So we have lots of
umbrella projects like that. Okay.
And just to be clear
to those listeners that don't
necessarily speak English, a zero
comp means zero configuration, right?
Right. It's a, it's a,
it's a broadcast networking protocol.
So it allows devices on
a network on a local
network to discover each other
without actually knowing in advance
IP addresses and so on.
So for instance, you can
locate printers or SSH servers.
And so on, on a
given network, I wrote Moana
zero cough because we needed
to work with iTunes is
digital audio sharing protocol. And
that's the discovery mechanism underneath
there. So you can see
in banshee, you can see
all the iTunes shares. Very
cool. Now you can play
videos too, right? Correct. As
of our latest sort of
generation of anti we support
videos, vantage has gone through
it's about three generations, I
guess, where we've had to
pretty complete refactoring and rewrite.
And the second one, the
goal was to, to use
motto addons and, and be
completely modular. So, you know,
only the core part of
Angie is written in pure
C sharp and it'll run
anywhere, anywhere there's we would
introduce or need for performance
reasons or for, you know,
to improve the user experience.
We always abstract something so
that we can implement the
best use of the actual
users resources in a given
system. And so one of
those ends is actually video
support. We use the G
streamer backend, hopefully universally, we're
trying to use G streamer
everywhere because juice rumor now
runs on windows, Linux, or
Mac, and g-string herself is
plugin based. So it uses
for instance, direct show indirect
X on, on, on windows
to do video rendering and,
and audio playback. It uses
the, the core audio core
video support in OSX to
do video rendering and playback.
And then it uses whatever's
available on Linux. Be it
open GL rendering, or rendering
straight to the X server
or whatnot. No. Then that
G stream is written in
C though. Yes. Just remember
a C library. Actually, the
only piece of banshee that's
not written in C sharp
right now is our media
pipeline API, which actually integrates
with G streamer. It's a
small amount of C it's
probably around 3000 lines of
C code that we then
bind. We P invoke into
from our abstracted media player
API. Hi, this is Scott
Hanselman with a word from
our sponsor. Do you know
how to build web 2.0
Ajax applications with web 1.0
components? You really can't. If
you want to do the
next generation web applications you'll
need next generation components. Just
like the ones that our
friends at Telerik have got
their rad controls for ESPN
and Ajax. It's a huge
pack of web controls built
on top of asp.net, Ajax
that lab previously impossible performance
interactivity to your next project.
The new controls mirror, the
Ajax API from asp.net. So
development is really straightforward. The
client scripts are shared. So
loading time is not a
problem. If you just set
a couple of properties and
you'll be able to automatically
bind a web services for
a really efficient operation, the
new rad editor from ESPN
Ajax, Telerik loads up to
four times faster than before.
And the new rad grid
handles thousands of records and
just milliseconds, but as always,
it's best to try for
yourself. So you can visit
dot com slash ASP,
net Ajax, and download a
trial. Thanks a lot. Okay.
And this is the part
that I wanted to understand
the most and forgive my
ignorance. But so there's a
G streamer C implemented. There's
a G streamer implementation that
is available for each of
these different platforms. It's not
the same binary, right? Right.
It's not the same binary
at this level where we're
at. See, so it has
to be compiled for each
given architecture and platform. All
right. So I want to
be clear for our listeners,
there's three or four different
implementations of shimmer and kind
of thinking about things in
terms of the way I
always think about it as
terms of the left hand
and the right hand. In
this case, you might have
a version of G streamer
for windows and the right
hand is talking to a
direct show, but the left
hand looks exactly the same
as the G streamer API
for Mac or for Linux.
Right? So, so G streamer
itself is sort of written
in a similar way only
it's, it's written in C
it's written in a similar
way as in terms of
its abstraction as, as banshee,
for instance, and that it
has its own internal plugin
model. So all the core
G streamer stuff, it's only,
there's only one implementation it's
written in C and it
can be compiled on, on
any platform and architecture, but
the actual plugins, the say
the plugin that provides video
rendering on windows or audio
rendering on the Mac there
specific implementations to that platform.
Right. Exactly. Okay. So then
with, with gene shimmer, then,
so then you have a,
a P invoke UUP invoke
into G streamer, and you
have structures that are, that
are handling that marshaling and
that are g-string were specific
managed structures. And then you,
you, you talk to those,
Right? So at the bench
level, we only talked to
G streamer in terms of,
of the common API. And
there, there are a couple
of, you know, very small
in cases where we don't
do that, where we know
that an optimal path on
windows is going to be
to go ahead and just
load the direct show plugins
instead of trying to search
for them in a registry
to figuring out which is
the best one, cause on
Linux, there are a number
of options that that could
be the right path, but
on windows, there's only one.
So if we detect and
live banshee the actual underlying
C library for banshee, if
we detect that we're on
windows, then we don't do
the kind of dynamic registry
loading thing. We instead just
directly create these direct show
elements for the pipeline. So
we have some cases where
we will definitely optimize code
paths for the given platform,
just for sheer performance reasons.
Can you talk a little
bit about where you hide
those things? Because whenever I
hear, when we detect that
we're on windows, or when
we notice we're on a
Mac, I kind of remember
some of the horrible sins
that I committed in Java
detecting where I was when
I wasn't supposed to be
knowing these things at what
layer of abstraction do you
bury all of this? If
on the Mac, if on
windows, is this code or
is this in the mano
add ins XNL files? Where
do Most of the time
and in the best cases,
and we've kind of diverse
a little bit from dotnet
here talking about G streamers.
So let me kind of
circle back around if most
of the time it's actually
just in the, the solution
file, the, the visual studio
solution file. And I should
mention, we use actual the
actual SLN and CS proj
files to build all of
banshee. So the project builds
with  on Linux, I'm
using monitor develop the, the,
the IDE that's very much
like visual studio that runs
on actually now it as
well runs on windows, Mac,
and Linux, but it supports,
you know, visual studio, 2005,
eight and 10 solution to
NCS profiles. So if, if
you run on Linux, if
you have five on Linux
and monitor, develop the actual
ms build conditions and so
on fulfill that platform detection.
So basically if we say
that a given ad in
or assembly is specific to
windows, then that never even
gets built on Linux or
Mac. But if we open
the solution file in visual
studio on windows, then the
EMIS bill conditions will pick
all the assemblies or projects
that will build only for
windows. So it will build
the core which builds everywhere,
and then it will build
any specific platform extensions to
windows. So at the ideal
level, it's all just taken
care of by way of,
of ms. Build. And then
you, there are some cases
inside of the core that
we do know for sure
that, you know, on the,
on windows, this was definitely
an optimal path, or we
don't need to do this.
And we can just use
the system dot environment dot,
like system environment, platform, or
something. And that's just an
email and they'll tell you
which platform you're running on.
And so that's perfectly valid.
It works on windows, it
works on motto and so
on, but there's very, very
few uses of that in
our code. We try not
to do any platform detection
at runtime, unless it's, you
know, a super critical code
path that we know we
can optimize safely. I just
mean that there's a banshee
dot exe kind of, you
know, the, the ultimate build
artifact that is specific to
each platform. Yes. That can
be the case. We don't
recommend topping the core assemblies
for, for like a Linux
build. Well, actually, it, it
depends as well Trying to
ask, is that, is it,
is it a reasonable dream
to have one bill that
produces one artifact that works
everywhere? Because I'm happy that
banshee is probably the best
example of a.net application that
can run on a half
dozen Linux implementations, Mac and
windows. And if someone, a
listener is going to think
about doing this, should they
just prepare themselves now to
have conditional builds? Like you've
got, or should they aim
for some, some magical food
dot exe? That'll do it
all. No. So even the
windows, for instance, well, I'll
use the windows, you know,
extensions as an example, they
would build on, on Linux
or Mac, cause it's just
managed code, but at runtime
they might crash because, you
know, they expect something or
some service provided by windows
to be there. So it's
really, it's not so much
about adapting your code to
do certain things based on,
on the platform you're running
on. When you're using a
proper kind of abstraction layer
that mano Adams provides. It's
more about picking the right
assemblies that are going to
be in that directory. I
want to give him a
platform you run on. I
see. Okay. So as long
as you've got the interfacing
lined up the way that
you want, it's just the
couple of platforms specific DLLs
that, that you need to
be aware of. And as
long as they're ready at
the time at, at runtime,
then you'll be okay. Right.
So, but, and then there's
the M it's build optimization
where it's, you know, if
we're creating a build on,
on, on Linux, don't even
try to build the windows
ones. Cause you're not going
to use them. That being
said as part of our
actual release process, when we
do a public release and
we create the DMG file
for, for Mac and we
create the RPMs and the
tarballs for Linux, we actually
run the build on all
those on those separate machines
so that you get, you
know, you don't have to
worry about it at release
time. When you just download
a release from the website,
you download the DMG and
it's, and it's just what
we need to give you
on the Mac. You install
the RPM and it's just
what you get on Linux.
Okay. So you build a
DMG on a Mac Formax
and you build an RPM
on Lenox for Lennox. Correct?
So I, I should say
that we have not actually
made a, an official release
on windows yet, but it,
it absolutely builds and runs
and we're just polishing a
few things up. And hopefully
before the end of the
summer, we'll finally have an
officially sanctioned and stable release
out for windows. So if
anyone's interested in helping out
on the windows port, I
shouldn't call it a port
because it's the same code,
but on the windows release,
then they should definitely get
in touch with us. I
know that you're not a
fan of, of living and
working in the windows world.
So definitely if someone has
some expertise in this area
that might want to jump
in and help you out,
that would keep you off
of windows. Right. And that
would be a good thing.
Well, you know, I'm not
opposed to windows. I just,
you know, my environment is,
is Linux. And in fact
that's what made that, the
reason why we got the
OSX port out first was
just because it was a
more familiar environment for us.
So, I mean, yeah, I'm
running windows right now, but
you know, it's a little
foreign in terms of, you
know, search paths and that
kind of stuff. Yeah, totally.
So any, any help from
the windows world is much
appreciated. We'd love to have
more windows users actively involved
in the community. No, I
think that when this thing
comes out, when you get
your, your actual official binary
release on windows, I think
that's going to be pretty
amazing because to be clear
that like the OSX people,
they don't really know, I
guess like most end users
don't realize this is like.net/motto.
That's really significant. Yeah. I
mean, that's, you know, it's
sort of a goal is,
is you, you really want
to focus on the user
experience and the application and
not really burden the user
with what's running underneath it.
So you're official, like you're
the official media player of
a number of Linux distributions,
is that correct? Correct. And
so there are a number
of mano applications that have
made their way onto Linux
distributions, such that they just,
they run and they look
and they act like any
other application. And that really
no one who doesn't care
has any idea that it's
happening. So that sounds like
a pretty, pretty achieved goal.
That's a pretty good thing.
Yeah. I mean, there's, you
know, there's, at this point,
there's, there's very widespread motto
adoption and you know, not
just in the Linux sector,
but you know, in, in
a lot of other places
too, you probably want to
talk to Miguel more specifically
about, about that kind of
adoption, but it's definitely grown
and, and it's only gonna,
it's only getting bigger. So
if people can get their
brains or if our listeners
can get their brains around
that and all the kind
of the plugin and the
hardware abstraction layers that you've
achieved in banshee on top
of all of that and
being a really awesome media
player. And I think you
said it was the first
media player that works with
the  phone It's it's.
So I just implemented hardware
support for the . So
that if you, for instance,
use the, the Amazon MP3
store on your phone and
you purchase music, banshee will
detect that you have actually
purchased music and it'll allow
you to sort of integrate
that into your library and
you can sync across it
just like with iPod. So
we support iPods and MTP,
like the, you know, the,
the place for short devices,
which I think now is
that spec is called something
about Vista, but, but we
work with those devices as
well. So, but on top
of all of this, you,
you also have scripting support
that you originally did in,
in BU Right? So actually
this, this is kind of
an interesting story, how this
evolved, BU which is a,
it's a, it's not quite
dynamic, but it allows you
to, to run code at
runtime. It, but it it's
a language that's very similar
to Python and it works
on.net works on motto. And
I think two years ago,
maybe I tried adding boost
support to banshee with the
idea that we, you know,
you could write plugins and
C sharp and compile them,
they load in banshee, but
I wanted to be able
to actually use our, our
internal API APIs at runtime,
just by typing a little
bit of code. And what
I found was that I
was able to easily integrate
BU but a lot of
our API APIs were, were
very, very internal and that
they didn't really make sense
unless you were running in
you're actually hacking or writing
code in the context of
the entire application. So it
was very difficult to actually
get little things done without
having to go into the
core and make changes. So
integrating BU actually led to
this major refactoring with mano
addins and, and kind of
put us in the mindset
that any API we write,
it needs to be, it
needs to make sense. It
needs to work well with
others. And, and that's sort
of when you go through
that kind of evolution of
an application, you end up
with an app that is
sort of automatically scriptable because
the API is makes sense.
So with the rewrite, we
wrote a book section, in
fact, BU boost support for
banshee is actually provided and
hosted in an extension that
extends the core. So it's
not actually there in, in
the default core application, but
it's provided as an extension.
And anything that loads into,
into memory in the process
can actually execute against any
of the API in the
abdomen. So by loading BU
into the add in which
in turn gets loaded into
Tibet itself, any boost scripts
that have user rights or
is executed, can pretty much
do anything and has all
the power that any, any
of Banshees core or add
in stuff as well, Just
that'd be dangerous at all.
Can, can you hurt yourself
with an evil boost script?
Sure. You can. I mean,
you know, you have the
power of, of the application
at your fingertips. You have
access to all the APIs.
So certainly this isn't something
that you would want to
execute based on untrusted code
from say online, but, but
yeah, I mean, it's a
very powerful, powerful mechanism to
allow you to extend applications
without having, without having to
get into like the build
environment and so on. You
can just pretty much execute
arbitrary code by plopping a
file on the disc. I
put a, a whatever dot
BU file in my banshee
scripts folder. And that doesn't
compile what's, what's the experience
like, man, I don't have
IntelliSense. It's all very dynamic.
It's just a text file
on a folder. You know,
how do I, how do
I write this? I mean,
how do I debug this?
Just keep trying, Well, there's
two things. One, if it
doesn't load, you'll see batchy,
we'll print out the actual
compiler error to the terminal,
to the console. So if,
if your, the idea is
that if you're writing a
boost script and you, and
you, if, you know, you
want to script your matcha,
you should probably be running
from a console while you're
developing that script. So that's
where the error message goes
and you'll, and it'll be
able to tell you, you
know, this API doesn't exist
at this line in your
boost script. And so you
go back and fix it.
It's, it's just like any
normal, you know, code writing
process that you might go
through. The difference is you
don't need to worry about
the build overhead and all
that kind of stuff. So,
you know, you can sit
at a, at a machine
that has banshee installed by
default, and it's just there,
but you, but you don't
have the ability to compile
anything or you don't have
monitor develop installed. So you
can't bootstrap the project and
build it yourself. You're just
running the system version and
you'll still be able to
actually extend it just by
writing the script. Now, if
you really get into it
and you do have that
build environment, you can actually
cause monitor, develop, support the
BU as well. It supports
the syntax, and then it
can do the IntelliSense. If
you, if you load the
assemblies, the Bantu assemblies into
the monitor develop project, then
as you're typing blue code,
it can actually do the
intelligence against the banshee API.
So you can develop scripts.
You know, even if you
don't know, I guess the
API is as well as,
as, as we do. And
then of course we have
API documentation as well that
you can look at. It's
not, yeah, the documentation is
there. So you can see
the API structures, but we
don't have a lot of,
of actual like comments in
the documentation yet, which is
another thing that we would
love community health for Now.
You've also got support for
the DLR, is that correct?
Correct. So Microsoft now has
the dynamic language runtime, which
runs on on now. It
runs, you know, fall asleep
on the, on the latest
version of the modern runtime,
the two dot four version
and the deal our allows
us to, to execute a
number of languages, not just
BU so the DLR supports
Ruby and Python, for instance,
so that your users can
now extend back to using
Python or Ruby as well.
The DLR extension is not
yet in our main, in
our main get branch. So
cause I'm still hacking on
it, but it does work.
And it's, it's actually a
much nicer experience than BU
simply because, you know, you
can use languages that are,
that are more familiar while
BU is easy to pick
up. Especially if you know,
Python, it's still not, it's
not Python, it's very Python
inspired, but I think, you
know, working in Ruby or
Python itself is actually much
better user experience. And I
think there's even a, an
effort or at least there
was to actually rebase the
core of goo on top
of DLR. So you actually
get the boot language, but
running on the DLR. So
with the scripting support, they've
got the ability to do
anything that they want to.
I mean, I suppose that
they're limited only by their
imagination, but what, what might,
what might I want to
do to a media player?
Why would I want to
script a media player? Do
you have any examples of
the kind of things that
I would do? So one
of the first things that,
that we had a script
for was well, okay. So
in the, in the Linux
world, you've got a lot
of kind of old school
Unix guys who, you know,
they don't like spaces in
their file names. They don't
like uppercase letters and this
kind of stuff, but we're
not trying to, we're trying
to cater more to end
users and, and sorta be
platform agnostic. So we don't
want to assume that we
have a bunch of windows
users. We don't want to
assume we they're, you know,
they're all Linux users and
Mac users. We want things
to make sense. So in,
in, in the preferences dialogue,
you can choose how you
want your media library on
disc to be laid out.
So you can say that
I want my folders should
be artists slash album name
slash, and then the file
name should be, you know,
track number dash track, title
dot file extension, right? It's
something people are very passionate
about. Yeah, there are definitely
people passionate about the way
their, their, their library's laid
out on disc. So we
allow you to configure that,
but we don't allow in
the UI super complicated patterns
cause we don't want to
clutter or confuse the actual
UI. So we, we define,
you know, six or seven
sensible and common file or
directory layout. And we define,
you know, a handful of
file name layouts as well.
So there's just a dropdown.
You can choose if you
go in and you edit
the actual like config file,
you can actually change the
pattern yourself by hand. So
it's just an expression that
expands to a, against a
given track. So you can,
you can enter arbitrary data
and banshee will fill that
out for you. But what
we had was users who
weren't even satisfied with the
ability to control the path
layout by hand, and that
they didn't like spaces and
they didn't like uppercase letters
and so on. So you
can write a boost script
that actually hooks into the
path formatting API, and it
runs these hooks that you
can then define in your
script. So you can basically
give it a regular expression
to run against the full
path when it's done or
components of the path. So
you can choose, you know,
they specify the exact pattern
they want with, you know,
timestamps and or any arbitrary
data that you can pull
from the database. Anything that's
that's in the of database,
you can, you could put
into this final name, but
then they run an expression
on it that says translate
all the lower or upper
case letters, lowercase change spaces
to dashes and so on.
So that's, that was like
one of the first examples
of a script where we
had these diehard Unix guys
who, who weren't happy with
the way their files load,
but I wasn't about to
disrupt the UI 4.005% of
our user base. They were
happy with the script, but
you shut, you shut up,
you know, 0.05% of your
user base by giving them
the ability to script it.
So now they can do
anything that they want to,
right. So, you know, the
scripting is definitely for, for
power users, but it's for,
I like to think of
it as a, as a,
as a user feature for
power users, but also as
a way of, of getting
new contributors who are otherwise
kind of, you know, it's
a daunting process to actually
get the whole build environment
set up. So it's a
way that you can sort
of get your feet wet
with both just learning code
and then actually see it
happen in real life. And
also, you know, if you
want to contributing to the
project, it's an easy way
to get started. Very cool.
So it's kind of a
segue into the, into the
real hardcore, you know, programming,
but, but it's also a
user feature for these really
diehard, you know, power users.
Well, I think a lot
of the listeners are our
windows folks and it sounds
like you're going to have
a windows version towards the
end of the summer. And
as we said before, if
people are interested, they can
find you@avock.org, a box.org, and
they can find the banshee
project@bansheehyphenproject.org, and I'll have links
to all of that in
the, in the show notes.
I really appreciate you taking
the time to sit down
and help me understand that,
how to make cross-platform applications
with mano and banshee is
a really great example of
that. Great. I'm really pleased
that you me Cool. Well,
this has been another episode
of Hansel minutes and we'll
see you again next week.